[docs] Add docs page for unstyled Modal (#31417)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/base/components/modal/modal.md

---
product: material-ui
title: React Modal component
components: Modal, ModalUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: modal'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal
---

# Modal

<p class="description">The modal component provides a solid foundation for creating dialogs, popovers, lightboxes, or whatever else.</p>

The component renders its `children` node in front of a backdrop component.
The `Modal` offers important features:

- 💄 Manages modal stacking when one-at-a-time just isn't enough.
- 🔐 Creates a backdrop, for disabling interaction below the modal.
- 🔐 It disables scrolling of the page content while open.
- ♿️ It properly manages focus; moving to the modal content,
  and keeping it there until the modal is closed.
- ♿️ Adds the appropriate ARIA roles automatically.

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

> **Terminology note**. The term "modal" is sometimes used to mean "dialog", but this is a misnomer.
> A modal window describes parts of a UI.
> An element is considered modal if [it blocks interaction with the rest of the application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_window).

> If you are creating a modal dialog, you probably want to use a [Dialog](/material-ui/dialog/) component rather than directly using Modal.

Author: Yep agree, once we go on reviewing the MD pages, we can tackle that one. Also, this link will change once we have an unstyled Dialog component in the base package :)

> Modal is a lower-level construct that is leveraged by the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Modal` is a lower-level construct that is leveraged by the following components:
```

> Modal is a lower-level construct that is leveraged by the following components:

Author: Is used by maybe?

> Modal is a lower-level construct that is leveraged by the following components:

Reviewer: Let's go with that, if that's the case.

- [Dialog](/material-ui/react-dialog/)
- [Drawer](/material-ui/react-drawer/)
- [Menu](/material-ui/react-menu/)
- [Popover](/material-ui/react-popover/)

## Basic modal

```js
import ModalUnstyled from '@mui/base/ModalUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "ModalUnstyled.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false }}

## Nested modal

Modals can be nested, for example a select within a dialog, but stacking of more than two modals, or any two modals with a backdrop is discouraged.

{{"demo": "NestedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Transitions

The open/close state of the modal can be animated with a transition component.
This component should respect the following conditions:

- Be a direct child descendent of the modal.
- Have an `in` prop. This corresponds to the open/close state.
- Call the `onEnter` callback prop when the enter transition starts.
- Call the `onExited` callback prop when the exit transition is completed.

>   These two callbacks allow the modal to unmount the child content when closed and fully transitioned.

Author: The modal is transitioning while closing, for example using a fading animation. This is what it refers to closed and fully transitioned. It refers to the modal dialog itself.

Modal has built-in support for [react-transition-group](https://github.com/reactjs/react-transition-group).

{{"demo": "TransitionsModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> Alternatively, you can use [react-spring](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-spring).

Author: No, we have a build-in support only for `react transition group`, hence we say "Alternatively" (it means you can use other libraries, but it will require some additional effort)

> Alternatively, you can use [react-spring](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-spring).

Reviewer: OK, in that case I think we should say something like:

> You can also use react-spring with `Modal`, but it will require additional custom configuration:

{{"demo": "SpringModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ## Performance

Author: It's more common to keep the modal mounted for performance reasons, for example not needing to render the content each time the modal is opened or to render it ahead of time, not at the moment when the developer clicks the button to open it. The less common use-case is to make the content available for search engines.

> ## Performance

Reviewer: Ah I see, in that case we may want to rearrange/rephrase this section to convey this more clearly.

> ## Performance

Author: > The `Modal` component's content is unmounted when it is not open.
> This means that it will need to be re-mounted each time it is open. If you are rendering expensive component trees inside your modal, and you want to optimize for interaction responsiveness, you can change this default behavior by enabling the `keepMounted` prop.
> 
> You can also use the `keepMounted` prop if you want to make the content of the modal available to search engines (even when the modal is closed).

Maybe soemthing like this?

The content of modal is unmounted when closed.
If you need to make the content available to search engines or render expensive component trees inside your modal while optimizing for interaction responsiveness

> it might be a good idea to change this default behavior by enabling the `keepMounted` prop:

Reviewer: What does "optimizing for interaction responsiveness" mean? Is there another way we can phrase this to be more clear?

> it might be a good idea to change this default behavior by enabling the `keepMounted` prop:

Author: If the content of the modal is very complex and requires some time to be rendered, keeping it mounted (but not visible) even when it is closed allow us to faster show it when necessary, optimizing the time it needs to render :) we basically want to say that developers will be able to interact immediately with it :)

```jsx
<Modal keepMounted />
```

{{"demo": "KeepMountedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> You can use the `MuiModal-hidden` class to hide the modal when it is not opened.

> As with any performance optimization, this is not a silver bullet.

Author: It refers to the optimization. Maybe:
```suggestion
As with any performance optimization, it is not a silver bullet.
```

Be sure to identify bottlenecks first, and then try out these optimization strategies.

## Server-side modal

React [doesn't support](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/13097) the [`createPortal()`](https://reactjs.org/docs/portals.html) API on the server.
In order to display the modal, you need to disable the portal feature with the `disablePortal` prop:

{{"demo": "ServerModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Limitations

### Focus trap

The modal moves the focus back to the body of the component if the focus tries to escape it.

This is done for accessibility purposes. However, it might create issues.
In the event the users need to interact with another part of the page, e.g. with a chatbot window, you can disable the behavior:

```jsx
<Modal disableEnforceFocus />
```

## Accessibility

(WAI-ARIA: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal)

> - Be sure to add `aria-labelledby="id..."`, referencing the modal title, to the `Modal`.

Reviewer: Let's explain _why_ the developer should do this.

```suggestion
- All interactive elements must have an [accessible name](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Attributes/aria-labelledby). Use the `aria-labelledby="id..."` to give your `Modal` component an accessible name.
```

Reviewer: Is `id` specifically required in the Modal's accessible name? Or is `id...` an agreed-upon placeholder for any name that the developer wants to use? _Is_ there a standard placeholder used in the MUI docs?

If not, I would suggest making it as obvious as possible that the dev can use whatever they want. Something like `aria-labelledby="MODAL_NAME_HERE"`.

Author: The id is the HTML id of the element describing it. It can be any arbitrary string.

>   Additionally, you may give a description of your modal with the `aria-describedby="id..."` prop on the `Modal`.

Reviewer: Brevity.

```suggestion
  You can also use `aria-describedby="id..."` to provide a description of the `Modal`:
```

  ```jsx
  <Modal aria-labelledby="modal-title" aria-describedby="modal-description">
    <h2 id="modal-title">My Title</h2>
    <p id="modal-description">My Description</p>
  </Modal>
  ```

> - The [WAI-ARIA authoring practices](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/examples/dialog-modal/dialog.html) can help you set the initial focus on the most relevant element, based on your modal content.

Reviewer: Be more direct.

```suggestion
- Follow the [WAI-ARIA authoring practices](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/examples/dialog-modal/dialog.html) to help you set the initial focus on the most relevant element based on the content of the modal.
```

> - Keep in mind that a "modal window" overlays on either the primary window or another modal window. Windows under a modal are **inert**. That is, users cannot interact with content outside an active modal window. This might create [conflicting behaviors](#focus-trap).

Reviewer: I think this deserves to be called out as a cautionary note. Also edited for clarity.

```suggestion
> ⚠ **Note:** a modal window can sit on top of either the parent application, or another modal window. _All_ windows under the topmost modal are **inert**, meaning the user cannot interact with them. This can lead to [conflicting behaviors](#focus-trap).
```

---
product: material-ui
title: React Modal component
components: Modal, ModalUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: modal'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal
---

# Modal

> <p class="description">The `Modal` component lets you create dialogs, popovers, lightboxes, and other windows that force the user to take action before continuing.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p class="description">The `Modal` component lets you create dialogs, popovers, lightboxes, and other elements that force the user to take action before continuing.</p>
```
_Windows_ is just sounding weird in this context, _element_ sounds better for some reason... Not a strong opinion, though.

Reviewer: I opted for "window" since that's the terminology used in the Wikipedia entry, but I'm not married to it either.

> The `Modal` component renders its `children` node in front of a backdrop component. This lets you create an element that your users must interact with before continuing in the parent application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Modal` component renders its `children` in front of a backdrop. This lets you create an element that your users must interact with before continuing in the parent application.
```

> The `Modal` component renders its `children` node in front of a backdrop component. This lets you create a window that your users must interact with before continuing in the parent application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Modal` component renders its `children` node in front of a backdrop component. This lets you create an element that your users must interact with before continuing in the parent application.
```

If we comply with the above suggestion — to keep consistency.

> Features:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

Features:
```

> - 💄 Manages modal stacking when more than one is needed

Reviewer 3: I wonder why the lipstick emoji?

Reviewer: I wondered the same thing @michaldudak 😅 

Maybe 🥞 makes more sense?

Author: Was like that on the MD page :D No strong opinion, 📚 may be a different good candidate.

- 🔐 Creates a backdrop to disable interaction with the rest of the app
- 🔐 Disables page scrolling while open
- ♿️ Manages focus correctly between the modal and its parent app
- ♿️ Adds the appropriate ARIA roles automatically

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

> **Note:** the term "modal" is sometimes used interchangeably with "dialog," but this is incorrect.

> > A dialog may be _modal_ or _nonmodal_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> A dialog may be _modal_ or _modeless_.
```

Reviewer: My impression is that these two words are interchangeable. I'm not married to either one. [Modal & Nonmodal Dialogs](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/modal-nonmodal-dialog/) was one of my sources here.

Author: As the two terms are used in different places, how about we do:

```suggestion
> A dialog may be _modal_ or _nonmodal (modeless)_.
```

Reviewer 3: Perfect! :)

> 
> A modal [blocks interaction with the rest of the application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_window), forcing the user to take action.

> > As such, it should be used sparingly—only when the app _requires_ user input before it can continue.

Reviewer 2: This is a good example of why we could use an _info_ type of blockquotes. This information is not a warning per see, but rather a "did you know?" — Anyway, a bit of topic but wanted to highlight that!

Reviewer: +1 for that! I believe it was _Docs for Developers_ where I read the suggestion to use three kinds of callouts:

1. Note - interesting point to consider
2. Caution - keep this in mind to avoid problems
3. Warning - this is dangerous, proceed carefully

Author: +1 for having these three categories

Reviewer 2: Nice :) To not side-track this, I'll open an issue!

> If you are creating a modal dialog, the [`Dialog`](/material-ui/dialog/) component is better suited for this specific use case.

Reviewer 2: This means then that I'm not able to create a Dialog from this Base Modal component?

What if I wanted to create my own version of the below-mentioned components? Imagine I don't want anything to do with Material. How would I proceed? Should we cover this somehow?

Reviewer: The impression I got from the original wording is that it is _possible_ but not _preferable_. But I could be wrong about that.

Author: The original intention was: If you are creating a modal dialog, the Dialog is better suited for that use-case, as basically it cannot be closed without taking any action. You can achieve the same with a modal, but it will require more work. The modal is more of a utility component used to create different components, like dialogs, popovers, drawers etc.

Reviewer 2: I think it's good that we clarify this further because I could not want to install @mui/material because of one or two components. Maybe it's worth the "more work" instead of adding an additional library to my project (trying to think with a developer's mind here — I've seen this reasoning multiple times). 

So, adding examples on _how_ to create a dialog, popovers, drawers, based on it might be a very good & handy thing.

Reviewer: Great idea @danilo-leal, this is a good opportunity to "show" instead of "tell." So when we say "the Dialog is better for this use case," we can point directly to code samples that show how and why.

Author: We are going to create these components in the base package, we just haven't done that yet. Once we have them, we can simply link them to the users. How about for now, we remove this sentence and add it back once we have an unstyled dialog?

Author: I've commented the line and added comment to add it back once we have an unstyled dialog.

> `Modal` is a lower-level construct that is leveraged by the following components:

Author: ```suggestion
`Modal` is a lower-level construct that is used in the following components:
```

- [Drawer](/material-ui/react-drawer/)
- [Menu](/material-ui/react-menu/)
- [Popover](/material-ui/react-popover/)

## Basic modal

```js
import ModalUnstyled from '@mui/base/ModalUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "ModalUnstyled.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false }}

## Nested modal

> ⚠ **Note:** though it is possible to create nested modals—for example, a select modal within a dialog—stacking more than two at a time is discouraged.

{{"demo": "NestedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Transitions

You can animate the open and close states of a modal with a transition component, as long as that component fulfills the following requirements:

- Is a direct child descendent of the modal
- Has an `in` prop—this corresponds to the open/close state
- Calls the `onEnter` callback prop when the enter transition starts
- Calls the `onExited` callback prop when the exit transition is completed
> The `onEnter` and `onExited` callbacks tell the modal to unmount the child content when closed and fully transitioned.

`Modal` has built-in support for [react-transition-group](https://github.com/reactjs/react-transition-group):

{{"demo": "TransitionsModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> Alternatively, you can use [react-spring](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-spring):

Author: ```suggestion
You can also use [react-spring](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-spring) with the `Modal`, but it will require additional custom configuration:
```

{{"demo": "SpringModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Performance

The `Modal` component's content is unmounted when it is not open, making it inaccessible.

If you need to make the content available to search engines, or render expensive component trees inside your modal while optimizing for interaction responsiveness, you can change this default behavior by enabling the `keepMounted` prop:

```jsx
<Modal keepMounted />
```

{{"demo": "KeepMountedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> You can use the `MuiModal-hidden` class to hide the modal when it is not open.

As with any performance optimization, this is not a silver bullet.

> Be sure to identify bottlenecks first, and then try out these optimization strategies.

Reviewer: A more clear follow-up to the suggestion above.

```suggestion
Explore other possible bottlenecks in performance where you could make more considerable improvements before implementing this prop.
```

---
product: base
title: React Modal component
components: ModalUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: modal'

> waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal

Reviewer 3: This is required to make the ComponentLinkHeader's bundle size link point to the right location:

```suggestion
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal
packageName: '@mui/base'
```

## Nested modal

> ⚠ **Note:** though it is possible to create nested modals—for example, a select modal within a dialog—stacking more than two at a time is discouraged.

{{"demo": "NestedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Transitions

You can animate the open and close states of a modal with a transition component, as long as that component fulfills the following requirements:

- Is a direct child descendent of the modal
- Has an `in` prop—this corresponds to the open/close state
- Calls the `onEnter` callback prop when the enter transition starts
- Calls the `onExited` callback prop when the exit transition is completed
  > The `onEnter` and `onExited` callbacks tell the modal to unmount the child content when closed and fully transitioned.

`Modal` has built-in support for [react-transition-group](https://github.com/reactjs/react-transition-group):

{{"demo": "TransitionsModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

You can also use [react-spring](https://github.com/pmndrs/react-spring) with the `Modal`, but it will require additional custom configuration:

{{"demo": "SpringModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Performance

> The Modal component's content is unmounted when it is not opened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Modal component's content is unmounted when it is not open.
```

> This means that it will need to be re-mounted each time it is _opened_. If you are rendering expensive component trees inside your modal, and you want to optimize for interaction responsiveness, you can change this default behavior by enabling the keepMounted prop.

Reviewer: I should have been more specific here @mnajdova—"opened" doesn't need to be italicized, I just added that in my earlier comment to emphasize what I had changed. :)

```suggestion
This means that it will need to be re-mounted each time it is opened. If you are rendering expensive component trees inside your modal, and you want to optimize for interaction responsiveness, you can change this default behavior by enabling the keepMounted prop.
```

---
product: base
title: React Modal component
components: ModalUnstyled
githubLabel: 'component: modal'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-practices/#dialog_modal
packageName: '@mui/base'
---

> # Modal

Reviewer: Some of these pages specify "Unstyled" here and others do not. We should pick one and be consistent. I think it's worthwhile to add "Unstyled."

```suggestion
# Unstyled modal
```

> <p class="description">The `Modal` component lets you create dialogs, popovers, lightboxes, and other elements that force the user to take action before continuing.</p>

Reviewer 2: <img width="500" alt="Screen Shot 2022-03-18 at 11 38 45" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/67129314/159023489-90c7e3aa-e13b-473d-b44e-8a8972ee879e.png">

Not sure why but the backticks in the description text seems to not be working 😕

Reviewer: Is it because they're inside of a `<p>` tag? 

Speaking of which: why do these docs use `<p>` at the top here and then Markdown everywhere else? 🤔

Reviewer 3: Let's not use backticks, unless specifically referring to code or props.

> why do these docs use <p> at the top here and then Markdown everywhere else

Deep in the infrastructure sources, there is code that relies on the document having a summary. The `<p class="description">` tag is a way to mark it as one.

Reviewer: Thanks for that clarification @michaldudak!

The `Modal` component renders its `children` in front of a backdrop. This lets you create an element that your users must interact with before continuing in the parent application.

Features:

- 🥞 Manages modal stacking when more than one is needed
- 🔐 Creates a backdrop to disable interaction with the rest of the app
- 🔐 Disables page scrolling while open
- ♿️ Manages focus correctly between the modal and its parent app
- ♿️ Adds the appropriate ARIA roles automatically

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

> **Note:** the term "modal" is sometimes used interchangeably with "dialog," but this is incorrect.
> A dialog may be _modal_ or _nonmodal (modeless)_.
>
> A modal [blocks interaction with the rest of the application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_window), forcing the user to take action.
> As such, it should be used sparingly—only when the app _requires_ user input before it can continue.

> 
> If you are creating a modal dialog, the [`Dialog`](/material-ui/dialog/) component is better suited for this specific use case.

Author: ```suggestion
<!-- Uncomment the next line, once an unstyled dialog component is added in @mui/base -->
<!-- If you are creating a modal dialog, the [`Dialog`](/material-ui/dialog/) component is better suited for this specific use case. -->
```

`Modal` is a lower-level construct that is used in the following components:

- [Dialog](/material-ui/react-dialog/)
- [Drawer](/material-ui/react-drawer/)
- [Menu](/material-ui/react-menu/)
- [Popover](/material-ui/react-popover/)

## Basic modal

```js
import ModalUnstyled from '@mui/base/ModalUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "ModalUnstyled.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false }}

## Nested modal

> > ⚠ **Note:** though it is possible to create nested modals—for example, a select modal within a dialog—stacking more than two at a time is discouraged.

Reviewer 2: > stacking more than two at a time is discouraged.

Why? 😬

Author: Because they block the interaction with the elements behind them. If there are four stacked modals, and you want to go to back to the second one, you need to close two modals and make the interaction you did previously to get to the same state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ⚠ **Note:** though it is possible to create nested modals—for example, a select modal within a dialog—stacking more than two at a time is discouraged. The main reason is because they block the interaction of elements behind them. If you stack too many, it will be needed to close all of them in order to get to the root state.
```

Nice! Tried to add the reasoning somehow to this note—feel like it's very worth it. Let me know what you and @samuelsycamore think! May need a bit of tweaking to get the words right.

The Modal component's content is unmounted when it is not open.
This means that it will need to be re-mounted each time it is opened. If you are rendering expensive component trees inside your modal, and you want to optimize for interaction responsiveness, you can change this default behavior by enabling the keepMounted prop.

You can also use the keepMounted prop if you want to make the content of the modal available to search engines (even when the modal is closed).

```jsx
<Modal keepMounted />
```

{{"demo": "KeepMountedModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> You can use the `MuiModal-hidden` class to hide the modal when it is not open.

As with any performance optimization, the `keepMounted` prop won't necessarily solve all of your problems.
Explore other possible bottlenecks in performance where you could make more considerable improvements before implementing this prop.

## Server-side modal

React [doesn't support](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/13097) the [`createPortal()`](https://reactjs.org/docs/portals.html) API on the server.

In order to display a modal rendered on the server, you need to disable the portal feature with the `disablePortal` prop:

> {{"demo": "ServerModal.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 2: <img width="500" alt="Screen Shot 2022-03-18 at 11 41 57" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/67129314/159024153-0817742b-c08f-4adc-b577-41d7814b47e9.png">

Small tweak might be needed here — text gets white in dark mode.

Author: Nice catch, will fix it.

Author: I've updated all demos for dark mode.

- ♿️ Adds the appropriate ARIA roles automatically

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

> **Note:** the term "modal" is sometimes used interchangeably with "dialog," but this is incorrect.
> A dialog may be _modal_ or _nonmodal (modeless)_.
>
> A modal [blocks interaction with the rest of the application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modal_window), forcing the user to take action.
> As such, it should be used sparingly—only when the app _requires_ user input before it can continue.

<!-- Uncomment the next line, once an unstyled dialog component is added in @mui/base -->
<!-- If you are creating a modal dialog, the [`Dialog`](/material-ui/dialog/) component is better suited for this specific use case. -->

`Modal` is a lower-level construct that is used in the following Material UI components:

- [Dialog](/material-ui/react-dialog/)
- [Drawer](/material-ui/react-drawer/)
- [Menu](/material-ui/react-menu/)
- [Popover](/material-ui/react-popover/)

## Basic modal

```js
import ModalUnstyled from '@mui/base/ModalUnstyled';
```

{{"demo": "ModalUnstyled.js", "defaultCodeOpen": false }}

## Nested modal

> > ⚠ **Note:** though it is possible to create nested modals—for example, a select modal within a dialog—stacking more than two at a time is discouraged.

Reviewer 2: That sounds great to me!
